# A Summarization-Based Pattern-Aware Matrix Reordering Approach

## Our Implementations

We implemented the following algorithms in `./MatrixReordering/`

-   **Leaf Ordering** (with the Scipy Python package, ward hierarchical clustering)
-   **Rank-Two** (according to the algorithm description by [1])
-   **MDS** (with the sklearn Python package)
-   **Evolutionary Reordering** (translated into Python from the original implementation in R [2])
-   **MinLA** (implemented in Python according to authors' algorithm description [3])
-   **Biclustering** (implemented in Python according to the description in [1]);
-   **Collection-aware Leaf Ordering using $\delta_I$** (implemented in Python according to the original JavaScript code [4], ward hierarchical clustering);

We also implemented four metrics in `./MatrixReordering/Metrics.py`:

-   **LA** (linear arrangement): according to descriptions in [1];
-   **PR** (profile): according to descriptions in [5];
-   **BW** (bandwidth): according to descriptions in [1];
-   **MI** (Moran's I): translated from the original JavaScript code in [4];

Our two techniques (GRD and RMD) are implemented in `./MatrixReordering/PatternOrdering.py` (`greedy_ordering` and `randomized_ordering`).

## Experiments

Before running the code, please make sure that your computer has installed matlab (required by Experiment 1 to run VoG), pycharm, and python3. Note that all python code should be run in pycharm now, because relative path is not configured.
Please run `pip install -r requirements.txt` to install all required python packages.

### Experiment 1: How to run the pattern precision comparison?

The results of our previous experiments have been stored in the `PatternPrecisionComparison` folder. To see the results directly, you only need to perform the last step. To reproduce our experiments, you can follow all steps.

1. Run `cd ./PatternPrecisionComparison`

2. Run `.PatternPrecisionComparison/synthetic_generator.py` to generate synthetic datasets. They will be stored in `./data/synthetic-x.x-x.x-x.x.json`, `./data/synthetic-x.x-x.x-x.x.edgelist`, and `./data/synthetic-x.x-x.x-x.x.out`.

3. Run `./VoG/run_structureDiscovery.m` to run VoG. The detected patterns are summarized in `./VoG/DATA/synthetic-x.x-x.x-x.x_ALL.model`.

4. Run `./pattern_precision.py` to run our model. It will store the results of our model and VoG into a unified file: `./precision.csv`

5. Run `./pattern_significance.py` to run the Conover's test. It will generate the p-value.

6. Run `./draw-precision.html` (require a localhost, e.g., `python3 -m http.server xxxx`) to see the line charts.

### Experiment 2: How to run metrics comparisons?

The results of our previous experiments have been stored in the `MetricComparison` folder. To see the results directly, you only need to perform step 3 and 4. To reproduce our experiments, you can follow all steps. Note that the entire experiment lasts several hours, you can run it after sleeping 😅 or choose small datasets to run it (comment the 12th line in `./MetricComparison/definitions.py` and cancel the comment of the 14th line in it). Note that Table 1 (showing metrics for different patterns) in our paper also comes from this folder by running `./pattern_response.py` and `./draw-pattern-response.html`

1. Run `cd ./MetricComparison`

2. Run `./matrix.py` to reorder all twenty matrices (original data are stored in `/data/xxx.edgelist`) by nine different algorithms. Results are stored in `./matrix` and `./results.json`

3. Run `./draw-metrics.html` (require a localhost, e.g., `python3 -m http.server xxxx`) to see the charts.

4. To explore our results, you can open `./visualization.html` with a localhost.

### Experiment 3: User Study

The user study is performed by 15 participants. The synthetic dataset was generated by `./UserStudy/synthetic_generator.py` (graphs are stored in `./UserStudy/graph/` and reordered matrices are stored in `./UserStudy/matrix/`).

One participant needed to perform tasks with `./UserStudy/index.html` (require a localhost, e.g., `python3 -m http.server xxxx`). After finishing the tasks, a JSON file that stores his/her results will be downloaded. All participant results are stored in `./UserStudy/results/`.

Run `./UserStudy/data_analysis.py` could analyze the collected data. After analysis, run `./UserStudy/visualization.html` could visualize the results.

# References

[1] M. Behrisch, B. Bach, N. H. Riche, T. Schreck, and J. Fekete, “Matrix reordering methods for table and network visualization,” Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 693–716, 2016.

[2] https://web.archive.org/web/20080205025042/http://www.ewas.de/tables/bertin.r

[3] E. Rodriguez-Tello, J. Hao, and J. Torres-Jimenez, “An effective two-stage simulated annealing algorithm for the minimum linear arrangement problem,” Computers and Operations Research, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 3331–3346, 2008.

[4] [nvbeusekom/reorder.js: JavaScript library to reorder matrices (github.com)](https://github.com/nvbeusekom/reorder.js)

[5] N. van Beusekom, W. Meulemans, and B. Speckmann, “Simultaneous matrix orderings for graph collections,” IEEE TVCG, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2022.
